---
layout: page
title: "Multiple Objectives in Conservation Portfolios: Waverly Wind Farm"
---

# Background


My husband, kids, and I just got back from visiting my family in
Williamsburg, KS for Christmas. Just west of my parents' house is a
newly constructed wind farm impossible to miss on the horizon.

The [Waverly Wind Farm](http://waverlywindfarm.com/) is built,
maintained, and operated by [EDP Renewables](http://www.edpr.com/). The
project's website says the farm will operate 95 turbines at the Waverly
farm producing 199 megawatts of electricity and displacing 331,349 tons
of carbon dioxide from entering the environment.

<!-- Its easier to resize the html than markdown-->
<img src="images\Waverly_logo.png" width="250px" height="50px" />

Image Source: [Media Kit from Project
Website](http://waverlywindfarm.com/)

Of course a project of this scale is big news in my hometown and the
surrounding area. I am sure the construction of the farm brought a
noticeable economic stimulus to the small businesses in the area;
landowners now have an additional stream of income from their
properties; and parcels that host the turbines may see an increase in
value as a result.

My parents know (and I probably do to) several of the landowners with
turbines on their property. Rumor has it that the leases go for about
$500 a month per turbine. That is $6,000 per year and seems to be in
line with what is
[reported](https://www.wind-watch.org/documents/five-questions-to-ask-before-signing-a-wind-energy-lease/)
by [National Wind Watch](https://www.wind-watch.org/about.php), an
anti-wind-energy advocacy group, and
[reported](http://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/windustry/legacy_url/944/Compensation-2009-07-06.pdf?1421782808)
by [Windustry](http://www.windustry.org/), a pro-wind-energy advocacy
group.

As we were talking about the project my dad noted that it sounds like a
good deal but that "I wouldn't do it on native prairie land." Apparently
some of the turbines were constructed on native prairie grass. Waverly
is situated about 40 miles east of the [Flint
Hills](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flint_Hills), and there is a
considerable amount of undisturbed native tall-grass prairie. My dad is
not exactly an environmentalist, but he appreciates the value and
scarcity of native grasslands. He has even tried to restore some land to
native tall-grass prairie with little luck.

<img src="images\MeridianWayImage_01.jpg" width="250px" height="50px" />

Photo from the Meridian Way wind farm in Cloud county Kansas. Source:
[Media Kit from Project Website](http://waverlywindfarm.com/)

# Connecting to Research


On the long car ride home I started thinking about this conversation in
the context of my own research. [Amy
Ando](http://ace.illinois.edu/directory/amyando) and I wrote a
[paper](http://www.pnas.org/content/109/17/6484.short) published in the
[*PNAS*](http://www.pnas.org/) in 2012 that outlined how a
conservationist might use [Modern Portfolio
Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_portfolio_theory), which
informs how to pick a portfolio of stocks, to prioritize which land
should be protected in the face of climate change. The basic idea is
that future conservation benefits of any parcel of land are uncertain
because the severity of climate change is unknown and it is also unknown
how environmental or ecosystem characteristics will respond to a
changing climate.

However, if you can estimate the probability distribution, you can make
smart choices. By exploiting covariance (particularly negative
covariance) between the response of different tracts of land to climate
change, you can maximize you conservation benefits for a given level of
risk, or you can minimize your risk for a given level of conservation
benefits. The first paper published in *PNAS* invoked a highly stylized
example.
[Work](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0928765514000402)
on [this](http://le.uwpress.org/content/91/4/664.refs) problem since
then has focused on refining the technique to the point that the method
could be used in practice by a conservation agency or other institution.

We have work in progress that considers how multiple objectives might be
considered in the portfolio problem. There is very little work in this
area. Since the method comes from finance this is no surprise. When
picking stocks the expected return and its standard deviation are mostly
all one cares about. However, in environmental, resource, and
conservation problems, there are often multiple objectives one might
care about. Sometimes those objectives are complimentary, but not
necessarily so.

Consider the wind farm described above. The wind farm produces energy
with a low carbon footprint and displaces energy produced by coal fired
electric power plants --- thus it is *good* for the environment.
However, when the turbines are placed on native tall-grass prairie the
turbine itself and the access roads disturb a considerable amount of a
very scarce resource.

Considering just the environmental benefits of reduced carbon dioxide
emissions leads to the destruction of some native tall-grass prairie. If
a multiple objective approach had been used, alternative sites may have
served just as well and not degraded the native prairie. Of course, the
project is built by a private firm on land held by private citizens so
they would not consider the tall-grass prairie conservation objective
unless they were compensated for or prevended from (by regulation or
other means) doing so, or unless they by chance intrinsically valued the
tall-grass prairie resource more than the wind farm offered in
compensation.
